All right, a few recollections now. When did you
first meet Heisman Ren? Came to JPL to interview
for a job. And as the supervisor of the astronomy
group, I did the interviewing. So that was in, I
guess, sometime in 1961.
What did you think of him when you first met him?
Does not act like the public's typical image of
what an astronomer should act like. No.
But he had a lot of enthusiasm and a lot of bounce to
him. He was obviously knowledgeable. And he was
interested in working in a field where not too many
people were interested in working. And that
seemed more than adequate to me to offer the man a
job. Later, of course, we became very close
personal friends, and it's a little hard since
I've been in touch with him all of the time for the
past 30 years to really remember back to what I
thought of him 30 years ago. I can't help, I can't
separate that from the contemporary Spinrad,
but... He got pretty unhappy here at JPL. He got
unhappy here because he couldn't get telescope
time. And he, when he came here, assumed that he
would be treated like any other young astronomer,
and he found out to the contrary. He found out that
people were simply not giving time on large
telescopes to do planetary projects. They were
looked down upon. And he tried to mine the old plate
vaults at Mount Wilson. They were willing to have
him do that. But as far as getting new time at
McDonald or Mount Wilson, no luck. So he started
looking around, and when he got a job offer from his
old alma mater, he left and went to Berkeley. Okay,
let's... discuss the world's greatest planetary
astrophysicist, Gerard Peter Kuiper. When did
you first cross paths with him? Well, Kuiper was
around the lab all of the time in the early days of
the space program. Kuiper, of course, tended to
look upon anyone at JPL as being a good guy, because
to him the people at JPL were building the kinds of
spacecraft that he was interested in, they were
promoting the kind of work that he wanted to do, and
they were potential sources of funds. And so
anybody who worked at JPL was his friend. saw
anyone he recognized from JPL at a meeting and he
tended to back you into the corner and began to
harangue you with his latest theories and ideas
and he was a great guy. On the other hand, if you were
on an opposing team, he could be a pretty wicked
player. I don't remember when I first met him. I
know he came to the lab regularly. We had meetings
with him throughout the period from say 59 on. But I
couldn't give you an exact date. How about Girard
de Vaucouleur? Well, I worked with de Vaucouleur
on committees that were set up by NASA to look into
the need for planetary telescopes.
I attended these meetings, usually with Al Hibbs,
sometimes not, but people involved included Al
Wilson, DeVocalor, Stan Greenfield, who I guess
was with Rand Corporation at the time. We
sometimes met with people like, I don't know, what
was his name, Edson, I guess it was, who was... at
the Pentagon at the time as a civilian scientist at
the Pentagon.
Anyway, I met de Vaucouleur working on these
various teams together where we were trying to get
support for a NASA building, one or more large
planetary telescopes. And he was, of course, very
enthused about his Mars work at the time. met with
him often and enjoyed his company very much.
Tell me billions and billions of things about Carl
Sagan. Well, Carl, of course, was a graduate
student of Kuiper's when Kuiper first went to
Arizona. In fact, I guess he was a graduate student
before Kuiper went to Arizona. followed him there
from Chicago. I guess Carl's PhD is actually still
a Chicago PhD since he began it there. But I called
Kuiper one day and said, gee, we've been
interested in ideas about solar system cosmology
and the origin of the solar system and a lot of
disagreement on this, but you've done a lot of work
in the field. Could you sort of give us, write us a
position paper that tells us what at least your
current ideas are on where things stand with our
knowledge of how the solar system originally, how
it originated. And he said, gee, I wish I could. But
I'm awfully busy. However, I've got this very,
very bright young graduate student named Carl
Sagan. And I'm sure he'd do a bang-up job for you.
And he really needs the money. He's very poor. And
he'd do a great job. work out well all around. And so
I said, well, fine, sure. We'll let Carl work on
this. And so we met Carl. He was, of course, working
on his thesis on the greenhouse model of the Venus
atmosphere. And after he had pretty well along,
why, he came up to the lab and gave us a seminar on the
greenhouse model of the Venus atmosphere. And we
all met him.
known him ever since. Was he self-assured even
then? He was pretty self-confident, even in those
days, yes, very much so for a graduate student.
Yeah, he was always a very confident person, but
not overbearing or anything. He was just quite
sure of what he did. Where
did you first meet Harlan Smith, and what did you
think of him when you saw him? Harlan Smith, to me at
the time, seemed one of the senior astronomers of
the world. I don't remember where I first met
Harlan. I remember many incidents where I was with
him, like just the two of us had dinner together at
Snowmass, Colorado, when we were both there for a
meeting of the National Academy Solar System
Exploration Committee. I talked to him many times
at meetings of
the American Astronomical Society or of the
Planetary Sciences Division. He, of course,
hosted a couple of meetings of the Planetary
Sciences Division at Austin. I ran into him in many
places, but I really don't remember where I first
met Harlan or when. But it was always a great
pleasure to talk to him. I always felt that
although he was a very senior man in the field, that
he always treated everyone as if they were equal
and seemed to respect other people's opinions. He
was always an exciting person to talk to, and that
he was always full of both ideas about astronomy
and knowledge of the current political situation
and trying to get new telescopes or new probes or
whatever underway. And I was always very happy
when I could could sit down and talk to him. The last
time I saw him was at the AAS meeting in Pasadena
about five years ago. And there he grabbed me and
said he had this very bright young woman who was
about to get her PhD at Texas and wondered if there
might be any place for her at JPL. It was Jackie
Green. And I met Jackie, talked to her, and was very
much impressed by her. It turns out she went to
Hawaii for a couple of years, but she is, in fact,
now at JPL. But he was looking after his graduate
students, as he always did, and making a good case
for them. Actually, I don't think she was his
student. I think she was Roman Smolakowski's
student. But she was there in the department, and
he was looking out for them. Tell me something
about Roger Hoare.
Didn't have a close relationship with Roger. Knew
Roger when he was at headquarters. Served on a
committee or two with him. Was never close to
Roger. Never had any private dinners with him or
anything like that. Couldn't really tell you much
about Roger. Maybe you can tell me something about
Nancy Roman. Oh, I could tell you some things about
Nancy, yes. Nancy and I served together on the
Astronomy Subcommittee of NASA from 1960 to 62.
Nancy, of course, chaired that committee, so in a
sense I worked for her. I was JPL's delegate for the
first two years to that august group. Bill Brunk
for part of that time was the representative from
Lewis Research Center, where he worked at the
time, then left when he went back to finish his PhD.
We had a lot of outstanding consultants on it. And
that's another story in and of itself. But I worked
with Nancy fairly closely for two years. And to be
blunt about it, I was not always happy with Nancy. I
think the thing that really frosted me was her
very, very down-the-nose attitude toward solar
system astronomy generally. She felt that it was
very distinctly inferior to stellar and galactic
work. And I remember when we had a meeting of the
committee at the lab one time, she sort of took me
aside and said, rather confidentially, that
she'd been talking to Ira Bowen and that he had
agreed that there were still some things that
could be done from the ground in planetary
astronomy. And she gave me this information as if
it were a great discovery and something that, boy,
wasn't this interesting, that the great man, the
director of Mount Wilson and Palomar
Observatory, actually said there were still some
things that could be done from the ground in solar
system astronomy. And she was very surprised by
this. Well, I was promoting within the astronomy
committee the need for NASA to build their own
planetary telescope because of the difficulty of
getting time. And I remember a meeting we had at
Ames. I guess it was the last meeting that I
represented the lab. I'd served my two years.
People present included, for example, Jesse
Greenstein as a consultant. We had on that
committee people like Freeman Dyson, for
example, as a consultant to the committee. There
were a lot of big names there. Anyway, I made my
pitch. It probably took 10 minutes saying why I
felt it was important that NASA build their own
planetary telescope. She turned to Gary Mulders,
who was representing the National Science
Foundation. Well, what do you think about this?
And Mulders said that, well, he agreed totally
with what I had said, that the NSF could not support
building additional telescopes. They were hard
pressed to keep up with their requirements as they
were. and that he thought NASA indeed should go
ahead and build their own planetary telescope,
that they should support planetary astronomy. So
she asked Jesse Greenstein, and Greenstein said,
well, yeah, I quite agree. There are a number of
things, useful things that can be done from the
ground yet. NASA ought to do them. They're not
going to get enough time to do them on existing
telescopes, and yeah, they should do it. Well, I
went away feeling really good. I mean, the whole
committee had backed me up. NASA ought to build a
telescope. Well, that was my last meeting. But
somebody else then later showed me the minutes of
that meeting. And nowhere in those minutes of that
meeting do you ever find any part of this
discussion that strongly supports NASA building
a planetary telescope. And that really frosted
me. That had just been written out of the minutes.
Tell me something about Bill Brunk, who actually
ran the Ground-Based Planetary Astronomy for
longer than everybody else put together, I guess.
Yeah, I think that's true. And Bill and I, of
course, met each other when we were
representatives from JPL and from Lewis on this
initial Nancy Roman Planetary Astronomy. Or not
Planetary Astronomy, but this was the Astronomy
Subcommittee, which included, at that time,
solar system astronomy, solar astronomy,
stellar and galactic astronomy. It covered all of
astronomy.
So that we got to be friends and work together on
that
committee. And then he left to go back and finish
his PhD, and then came back to headquarters as an
employee. And Bill and I worked together closely
over the years. He was my program manager when I was
leader of the International Halley Watch, and he
We always got along well together. I think he
supported me pretty well. I have no real
complaints about that. I often felt, however,
that as people seem to do when they spend a long
period of time in Washington, DC, I think they tend
to lose touch with the realities in the field, as it
were, and in the field of astronomy. And they tend
to become more concerned about How do I fit what I
want to do within my budget? And how do I satisfy the
boss? Then am I suggesting what's best for
astronomy? And so I often disagreed with him on
whether he was really doing what was best for the
field. I felt he was out of touch at times. But he
tended to annoy me a little sometimes. But we
always got along well. Do you think planetary
astronomy is mined out? No. I think there are, as
long as the planets have atmospheres, those
atmospheres are going to change. We don't even
understand our own, let alone the atmospheres of
the other planets. I think continuing study of the
major planets is certainly in order. Until we have
some kind of permanent presence in orbit around
Mars or something, there's some work perhaps yet
to be done on Mars, but I think particularly in the
small bodies of the solar system, there are so many
of them that even if we eventually get missions to a
few of them, one or a comet or two, a few asteroids,
there are so many of them out there that the only way
that it's ever all going to be tied together is from
a ground-based study of these objects. And I think
even solar system planetary astronomy has got a
lot of future ahead of it because of the
impossibility of doing it all from space. What's
the position of planetary astronomy at JPL right
now? I think there is a little sense of dread, a
sense of Maybe we've seen the best days of it. I
think there's a morale problem at JPL today, to be
perfectly frank. The lab has generally been an
ebullient place to work, a place where everybody
sort of felt that the sky was the limit, upward and
onward, we're doing great things, and next year
we're going to do even greater ones. I think that
was true for many years. And I think there has now
come a realization that... This isn't going to
continue to happen quite that way. We're being
forced, probably correctly, to do business in
different ways in the sense that the
multi-billion dollar missions are just not going
to be flown. We've got to fly smaller missions.
There is a change of direction. This always means
some heartbreak for people who have been involved
in the old way of doing business for a time. And I
think among the planetary people in general, the
lack of support, we've seen the loss of a number of
very good people simply because they can no longer
get their ground-based work funded. And I think
there's a certain loss of morale and a fear of the
future, perhaps, rather than an eagerness for the
future. It's not a palpable thing exactly, but
everybody's concerned. Let's put it that way.
Well, that also answers what was going to be my next
question, what do you think of the future? But
again, this has got to be a guess, but you'll recall
in the past there were always been rumors they were
going to close JPL and make it the foothill campus
of Pasadena City College or something like that.
And of course, NASA does have big budgets. In the
long-term future, do you see JPL around in 20
years, and do you see any planetary astronomy
being done at JPL if it's still here? I think JPL
will still be here in 20 years, yeah. I think it'll
be a rather different place than it is today. I
think it won't have the outriggers that it does
today, that is the least space around town. I think
it'll probably all be here on one campus, so to
speak, except for the computing facility at
Woodbury. I think that the missions that we fly
will be smaller, perhaps a bit more often than the
big missions, but much smaller missions. I think
that there will perhaps be a tauter,
tighter management in the sense that I think that
you'll find more a skunkworks approach to things.
You won't throw people at a project, so to speak.
just doing things a little differently than
they've traditionally been done at the lab. And I
think the same thing is true of ground-based
astronomy. I think there will always remain
people here in the field, but I think that the
number may be somewhat smaller. And I think that
most people, instead of being able to spend 100%
time on research, there's almost nobody doing
that now even, although there were years ago. I
think you'll find everybody will have maybe half
time working on one of these projects, half time on
their research. I think JPL will continue to
exist, will continue to be a very reputable and
enjoyable, even, place to work. But I think that
the feeling of youthful enthusiasm
Well, at least among some of us older ones, it isn't
there anymore. We're not so young anymore is
perhaps the answer to that. I shouldn't really
answer for what some of the new young people coming
in may think about it. Since planetary astronomy
got back into high gear about 30 years or so ago,
what do you think the taxpayers have gotten out of
it? I think there have been a number of useful
things that have come out of the program, and you
can go at this many, many different levels. I think
they've gotten a sense of almost a competition
with the Soviets, and I think that the American
public generally enjoys a good contest. I think
they've got the feeling that we won some of it. I
think they've been excited and had their minds
opened a little bit by some of the discoveries. I
think that's good. Clearly the advances in
miniaturization and computing and so on that were
necessary for a lot of our space activities have
been carried on into regular commercial life. One
might argue that perhaps the Japanese have made
better use of these discoveries than we have in the
commercial sector, but certainly people have
very cheap, extremely potent desk computers
today. I don't know how much of this would have
happened without the space program. Maybe it
would have happened anyway, but certainly I would
feel it wouldn't have happened as soon. And I think
this is true in the medical field. I think there
have been a lot of great advances,
miniaturization and so on, application of laser
technology and so on, some of which was developed
within the space program that's being applied
here on Earth. I think just trying to open young
people's eyes to the universe, to the
impressiveness, the fascination of it, to give
them the impression that there's something more
important out there than accounting or or
belonging to a gang is important. It gives the
people, the young people, a sense of place in the
universe and that maybe there's something that
they can go out and do that will add to the good of the
world as opposed to just simply being consumers. I
don't know. What do you think modern planetary
astronomy has done for astronomy as a whole?
Hmm, haven't thought about that one. You think
it's shaken them up a little bit? Oh, it probably
has. I'm sure there's been some instrumentation
that's been developed by planetary people for use
on space probes that's been applied to
telescopes. I think a lot of the development,
though, has been military and then has dribbled
down into both planetary and classical galactic
and stellar astronomy rather than any direct
exchange just between the branches of astronomy.
Well, in addition to that, I'm thinking of
theories of star formation, which now, I guess,
have to include planets. Well, that's certainly
true. I mean, the discovery of the dust and what
have you around... several stars on Fomalhaut, I
guess, and Beta Pictoris was the first one, yeah.
And I guess there's some hints of material around
Vega.
That certainly has, they've interacted, let's
put it that way.
Well, as I said, Solar system astronomers,
planetary astronomers, and stellar astronomers
do talk to each other today, and I think have some
appreciation of the work that each other is doing,
and I think that both fields are more fruitful for
it. This is getting awfully general now, but what
do you think planetary astronomy has done for
science as a whole? I mean, it's obviously
affected something like biology, and I don't know
about geology and meteorology. I don't know about
chemistry so much. Well, what do you think? Well,
sure. Again, one of the things that the space
program in general has done is made us aware of the
fragileness of our own environment. And clearly,
if you're going to understand the Earth's
atmosphere, those same theories ought to apply to
other planets. And so we've got a number of test
subjects now where we can try to apply general
meteorological theories. which I'm sure that
studies of atmosphere of Venus and the major
planets have had impact on our studies of our own
atmosphere. Clearly, the studies toward the
planet Earth, as NASA now puts it, are of great and
even grave interest to the future of the human
race. Considerations of the greenhouse effect of
the ozone holes have a lot to say about whether
we'll even survive. And, of course, ultimately
there is the job of mapping out the small
near-Earth asteroids to the extent that if one
really does threaten the Earth, maybe we can do
something about it in the future. It isn't to say we
ought to mount any program now to do it. But what we
ought to be doing is trying to find all of these
bodies so we know if any of them are going to become a
threat and they have an impact on everything,
every person's life in that sense. But as far as
direct impacts on science,
all science is a unity, really. And I've just not
thought about the direct interchanges, say,
between astronomy and chemistry or science. had
enormous impacts on physics, clearly. I mean, the
interactions between astronomy and physics,
they're one. Astronomy is just physics applied to
the study of extraterrestrial subjects. You
often hear the statements made, such as, you know,
the space program has given us a view of the Earth as
seen from outside as a planet, and studies
round-basting probes of other planets have
shown, yeah, it is just another planet, but unique
and so forth. But do you think the public has really
changed its attitude towards, or the way it thinks
about Earth, or just changed its attitude,
period? I think there has been a change. I think the
average man in the street doesn't stop to think
each day that he should be concerned about whether
the earth is heating up or whether the ozone hole is
going to cause him to have skin cancer or not. But
certainly among those who read the daily
newspapers or weekly news magazines or even those
who listen to the TV news cannot help but be much
more aware of their world and of the fragile nature
of that world as a result of the space program, and
in particular of various kinds of solar system
studies. They have to be more aware of it and more
concerned about it. I mean, in the past, man is
largely worried about warfare, man against man.
But now I think he is finally becoming very aware,
or should be, that he may be doing himself in with
some of his activities, both as to use of resources
and his disposal of materials. When you meet
people, say strangers, say on an airplane,
they're sitting next to you, What's a reaction
when they find out what you do for a living? Most of
them, oh, gee, that's interesting. And then they
usually think a minute, and, gee, have you heard
about and something that they've read somewhere
or heard somewhere and were kind of curious about,
and can you tell me anything about thus and so?
That's often happened. They're usually
fascinated. So... So at least in your experience,
it's a positive image. I would say so, yeah.
Originally, and for the first few decades, JPL was
just strictly, let's face it, working for the Army
as a contractor developing weapons. When you
first came here, was that still a situation? Yes.
OK. When did JPL get handed over to the Army? Well,
we did, of course, work with the Army in putting up
the initial explorers. And then when we were
talking with the Army and with the defense people
about doing additional space-type missions that
were more researched than anything else before
NASA came into existence. But NASA then, of
course, was founded. Immediately, they were told
that they could take over existing laboratories
if the laboratories were willing to be taken over
to work with them on the space program that had been
proposed. So they said, well, since we had worked
on the explorers, where the obvious place to turn
to, they'd like to have JPL. And people at JPL were
very enthused about this. Most of the people here
felt they'd much rather work on studies of the
solar system than they would work on military
field artillery, long-range field rockets, and
that kind of thing, especially since that
knowledge was applicable to the new space program
as well. So that by... The end of 58, everybody here
was very enthused about being a part of NASA. I
think it was in 58 that NASA took us over then with
great enthusiasm on everybody's part here. Not
that we disliked the Army people we worked for, and
I mean, in some ways, working for the Army was a
rather pleasant experience in that we had a real
skunk works approach to things in those days and
the army would sort of come in with a bucket of money
and suggest that we do some work in an area and the
people here would kind of decide how the money
should be spent and if there were a lot of money in
the bucket at the end of the year no one was
concerned about it that there might be any less the
next year because we hadn't spent at all I mean they
spent what they had to spend to get the job done and
And if the bucket ran dry for some reason, why,
they'd simply go back to the Army and say, hey, you
know, can you fill up the bucket partway again? And
usually the bucket would get filled up. And nobody
was concerned in those days about which charge
number to charge this hour's work to, or it was just
There were broad tasks being assigned at JPL, and
the people here decided how best to carry them out,
and the money always seemed available. So in that
sense, the working relationship was great. It was
ideal. But, of course, the work being done was work
on missiles like the Sergeant, for example. So the
whole idea of converting our expertise over to
Learning more about the solar system was just, I
don't know, I think everybody reacted with great
enthusiasm, with a few exceptions.